
The Ninth Doctor and Rose follow a time-travelling metal cylinder to London during the Blitz of World War II. Landing about a month after the cylinder, the Doctor tries to track it, while Rose discovers a young boy wearing a gas mask on a nearby roof. Rose climbs on a nearby rope, but she realises too late that the rope is the tethering cable of a barrage balloon, and is carried off the ground. Captain Jack Harkness, a former time agent from the future posing as a Royal Air Force officer, rescues Rose with his camouflaged spaceship before Rose falls from the balloon. Jack mistakes Rose for a potential customer of an object that he is willing to sell. Rose plays along, but insists she needs to discuss the matter with her partner before buying.

Meanwhile, the Doctor returns to the TARDIS to find its phone ringing; despite caution from Nancy, a young woman nearby, not to answer it, he does, only to hear the voice of a child asking "Are you my mummy?" He follows Nancy to a house left empty from the recent air raid sirens, where Nancy and some orphaned children eat a meal abandoned by the homeowners. The Doctor tries to learn more from Nancy, but the boy in the gas mask knocks at the door. Nancy orders the children to leave by the back entrance, and warns the Doctor not to touch the boy. The Doctor opens the door anyway, but the child is gone. The Doctor catches up to Nancy and convinces her to give him more information. Nancy reveals that she knew the cylinder fell near a nearby hospital, and its appearance is tied to the boy.

The Doctor arrives at the hospital and discovers several patients wearing gas masks fused to their bodies. Dr Constantine explains that Jamie, Nancy's brother, was the first patient with this symptom. Suddenly, Constantine changes into another gas mask-wearing person, and the other patients all rise to start chasing the Doctor. Rose and Jack arrive and quickly escape with the Doctor. The Doctor forces Jack to admit that the crashed cylinder is just a Chula medical ship. The three are trapped in a room as the converted patients converge on them, all asking "Are you my mummy?" Nancy, who had returned to the home to get more food, is also cornered by Jamie, the boy, as he reaches out to her.



