

The Tenth Doctor and Donna visit the resort planet Midnight, the surface of which is bathed in lethal radiation from its star. The Doctor takes a shuttle tour to visit a waterfall made of sapphires. He goes alone as he is unable to convince Donna to leave the comfort of the local spa.

Mid-route, the shuttle unexpectedly stops; the Doctor joins Driver Joe and Mechanic Claude in the cockpit and see all systems appear operational but they are simply not moving. The Doctor asks Joe to briefly open the cockpit radiation shielding to see what may be causing the problem, and before they are forced to close them again, Claude claims to have seen something moving outside. Joe calls in for a rescue shuttle, but it will take some time to arrive.

The Doctor returns to the cabin, as he, the hostess, and other passengers hear knocking on the sides of the shuttle. The knocking seems to follow their movements, but soon comes from the same side of the shuttle where one passenger, Sky, is cowering. When the shuttle is rocked violently, the hostess goes to check in with Joe and Claude, only to find the cockpit has been ripped from the shuttle. The Doctor and other passengers see Sky behaving oddly, repeating what they are saying, frightening the passengers who think she has become possessed by whatever was outside, but the Doctor is intrigued. Sky starts to only repeat what the Doctor says, the delay becoming much shorter, and soon is speaking simultaneously with the Doctor. The Doctor deduces that the entity from outside may be trying to communicate to them through Sky as it learns vocal communications, and tries to reason with it, against the other passengers' fears.

As the Doctor converses with Sky, she starts saying things before the Doctor repeats them, making the other passengers believe the entity has moved on to possess the Doctor. Sky attempts to convince the passengers she is back to normal, and that they must throw the Doctor off the shuttle. While most of the other passengers start to pull the Doctor towards the shuttle door, the hostess, hearing Sky use some of the Doctor's unusual phrases, realises Sky is still possessed. The hostess pulls herself and Sky out of the cabin and into the radiation, sacrificing herself to save the Doctor. The shuttle passengers are left to sit in silence until their rescue arrives, shaken over the events and shamefully realising that none of them thought to ask the name of the hostess. Donna speaks to the Doctor upon his return, where he reveals that he will inform the company about the entity so they will remove their presence from the planet and let Midnight keep turning around its lethal star in silence once more.


