
The Eleventh Doctor, Amy, River and Father Octavian and his surviving clerics escape the approaching Weeping Angels when the Doctor destroys the gravity globe illuminating the cave they are in, allowing them to jump up into the gravity well of the crashed starship Byzantium. They scramble inside as the Weeping Angels start to follow, and the Doctor directs the group to the ship's oxygen factory, a forest contained within the ship. As they pass the primary control room, the Doctor notices a familiar crack in its wall, leaking time energy that the Weeping Angels are being drawn to.

Amy starts becoming more afflicted by the image of the Weeping Angel in her eye, and the Doctor instructs her to keep her eyes closed, preventing her from seeing it. Octavian has the clerics guard Amy while he, the Doctor and River make for a secondary control room on the other side of the oxygen factory. During this, the Doctor learns that River is Octavian's prisoner, promised a full pardon if she helps capture the Weeping Angel. Octavian is killed by a Weeping Angel but this allows the Doctor and River to enter and secure the control room. They analyse the crack and confirm that the leaking energy came from an explosion in time, and are able to narrow the date of the explosion's epicenter.

Meanwhile, the Weeping Angels start to move away from the primary control room. The clerics are erased from time by the crack as it grows wider. River teleports Amy to the secondary control room, rescuing her from the Weeping Angels.

The Doctor knows they must close the crack, and figures that a complicated space-time event, such as a Time Lord like himself or the whole of the Weeping Angels, must enter the crack to close it. The Weeping Angels' energy drain of the Byzantium engines cause the artificial gravity to fail, and the Weeping Angels fall into the crack. The crack closes, and because the Weeping Angel that infected Amy has been erased from time, she is no longer afflicted by it.

River is taken back into custody. Amy asks the Doctor to take her back to Earth on the day he took her, and she shows him that she is to be wed the next day. The Doctor is shocked when he finds that that date is the same time as the time explosion that created the cracks.



