

With the United Nations Intelligence Taskforce providing security, the British space programme under Professor Ralph Cornish oversees the launch of the Recovery Seven probe. This has been sent into Earth orbit to make contact with the missing Mars Probe Seven and its two astronauts, who lost contact with Earth eight months earlier. The pilot of Recovery Seven, Van Lyden, makes contact with the Mars probe but is then silenced by a piercing unearthly sound. The noise troubles the Third Doctor who travels with his assistant Liz to the Space Centre to investigate, offering insights into the origin and meaning of the sounds, which he interprets as coded messages. He also identifies a reply sent from Earth, which is triangulated as coming from a warehouse seven miles away. Led by Brigadier Lethbridge-Stewart, UNIT troops attack the warehouse and engage in a gun battle with troops commanded by General Charles Carrington.

Meanwhile, Recovery Seven has returned to Earth. But whilst UNIT is transporting it to the Space Centre more of Carrington's troops stage an ambush and hijack it. The Doctor locates it, by which time it is empty. Carrington has ensured the occupants—three space-suited astronauts—are detained elsewhere and is feeding them with radiation to keep them alive. Carrington is now introduced to the Doctor by Sir James Quinlan, the Minister for Technology, as head of the newly formed Space Security Department. Carrington says his actions were to protect the astronauts, as they have been infected with contagious radiation. Quinlan states the government did not want the public to become panic-stricken and reveals that Carrington has been acting with government authority.

By the time Carrington takes the Doctor to meet the astronauts a criminal named Reegan has organised their abduction, killing the soldiers and scientists guarding them. When the Doctor and Liz examine the site, they realise that human tissue could not have withstood the degree of radiation being emitted by the mysteriously irradiated astronauts. The Doctor believes the real astronauts are still in orbit, and that the three space suits contain alien beings. Reegan engineers the kidnapping of Liz Shaw to aid his own scientist, Lennox, a disgraced Cambridge professor, in keeping the alien astronauts alive. Reegan has even been supplied with a device to communicate with the aliens and sends them to the Space Centre to kill Quinlan. It now becomes clear to UNIT that the aliens are emitting radiation like walking reactors, and that to touch them brings instant death. It is also evident, to Liz, that Reegan is taking orders from someone else. She helps Lennox escape, and he tries to reach the Brigadier, but his bid for freedom is cut short by Reegan's merciless revenge.

Ralph Cornish is determined to launch another spacecraft to retrieve his astronauts, who the Doctor believes are still in the Mars Probe capsule in Earth orbit. The Doctor volunteers to pilot the rocket himself. As he prepares to blast off, Reegan tries to sabotage the mission by tampering with the fuel, but the Doctor survives and succeeds in piloting the craft to its scheduled rendezvous in Earth orbit, but at the last moment an enormous spacecraft bears down on the two linked capsules and engulfs them. Aboard the alien spaceship, the Doctor discovers the three human astronauts, unharmed, but they have been mentally conditioned to believe they are in extended quarantine at Space Control on Earth. An alien being reveals itself and explains the humans are being held pending the safe return of the alien ambassadors, who have been sent to Earth to make peaceful contact with mankind. The Doctor assures the alien commander that the authorities on Earth knew nothing of this and gives his personal guarantee to return the ambassadors safely. The alien commander threatens to destroy the world if the ambassadors are harmed.

When the Doctor touches down, he is kidnapped by Reegan, who reunites him with Liz. Reegan's paymaster, and the real organiser of the situation, is revealed: General Carrington. The General's actions have been prompted by paranoia, arising from his own encounter with the aliens when he was an astronaut on Mars Probe Six, where he witnessed his co-pilot, Daniels, killed by merely touching one of them. Carrington's mind is broken: he has lured the three aliens to Earth in order to expose them on television and intends to call on the nations of the world to attack them. The use of the ambassadors to kill was done simply to arouse public opinion against them. But Carrington is so mentally disturbed by his experiences that he cannot grasp the fact that the aliens can destroy the world and cannot be defeated.

Carrington departs for the Space Centre, where he aims to unmask the ambassadors before the eyes of the world on an international TV hookup—and then call on the powers of the Earth to destroy their spaceship. No one else knows what Carrington intends to say on TV: his plan calls for a surprise revelation of the alien nature of the space-suited figures. But the Doctor manages to send a radio message, and the Brigadier and UNIT soldiers rescue him and Liz, and also apprehend Reegan and his thugs. They race to the Space Centre where the Brigadier arrests Carrington before he can make his broadcast. He is taken away, protesting that he was only performing his moral duty. The Doctor arranges for Ralph Cornish and Liz to return the ambassadors to their own people so that the three human astronauts can be released.



