
The newly regenerated Eleventh Doctor crash-lands his TARDIS in the English village of Leadworth. The Doctor leaves the TARDIS to self-repair while the girl Amelia Pond helps him recover. She shows him a crack in her bedroom wall that he recognises as a tear in space-time, leading to an Atraxi prison. The Atraxi alert him to the escape of Prisoner Zero. Before he can respond, he must take the TARDIS for a short trip to help its repairs, and promises Amelia he will be back in five minutes. She packs a suitcase and waits for him.

The Doctor returns, unaware twelve years have passed. He is accosted by an older Amelia, now going by Amy, who has been ridiculed by the townsfolk for her fascination with her "raggedy Doctor". The Doctor sees a door hidden by a perception filter in Amy's home, and finds Prisoner Zero inside. They flee before it attacks. The Atraxi arrive in Earth's orbit and, speaking through all communication devices, demand they turn over Zero or they will destroy the Earth.

Searching for Zero, who is able to take the form of any unconscious being that it has telepathically linked to, they run across Amy's boyfriend Rory, who helps spot Zero posing as one of the coma patients in his care. The Doctor directs Amy and Rory to the hospital, while he gate-crashes an online meeting of experts discussing the Atraxi warning to give them instructions. Amy and Rory corner Zero at the hospital, and the Doctor arrives as the experts execute his plan, broadcasting "zero" to the Atraxi along with the photos of the coma patients from Rory's phone, revealing Zero's identity. Zero shows it has one more form, knocking out Amy and taking the form of Amelia. The Doctor speaks to Amy's subconscious to force Zero to take its native form, allowing the Atraxi to recapture it. Zero warns the Doctor as it is taken away "silence will fall". As the Atraxi leave Earth, the Doctor declares that he is Earth's protector and sternly cautions them not to threaten the planet again.

The Doctor returns to the fully repaired TARDIS and leaves without saying goodbye. He rematerialises two years later, and while Amy is still bitter over his original disappearance, she agrees to his offer to travel with him. As the TARDIS dematerialises, the viewer is shown Amy's bedroom, where her wedding dress lies.



