
In 1893, Silurian Madame Vastra, her human wife Jenny Flint, and their Sontaran butler Strax are asked to investigate the "Crimson Horror", a mysterious cause of death in which victims are found dumped in the canal with bright red skin. The latest victim, Edmund, has the image of the Eleventh Doctor retained in his retina. Vastra, Jenny, and Strax travel to Yorkshire, where Jenny infiltrates Sweetville, a utopian community led by chemist and engineer Mrs Gillyflower and the never-seen Mr Sweet.


Jenny discovers the Doctor, who is chained up and exhibits red skin and a stiff stature. At his silent direction she puts him into a chamber to reverse the process. Once restored, he explains to Jenny that he and Clara were also investigating the Crimson Horror. They had also infiltrated Sweetville, but learned that they were to be preserved to survive an apocalypse. The process did not work on the Doctor because he was not human, and he was saved from being destroyed when Mrs Gillyflower's blind daughter Ada had hidden him. The Doctor finds Clara and reverses the process on her. Meanwhile, Vastra recognises that Sweetville is using the venom of a prehistoric red leech her people knew. The Doctor and Clara confront Mrs Gillyflower, who reveals that she plans to launch a rocket to spread the poison all over the skies; everyone on Earth will die except those "perfect" people she had preserved, who will then start over to make a better world. "Mr Sweet" is also revealed to be a red leech from Vastra's prehistoric times that has formed a symbiotic relationship with Mrs Gillyflower. The Doctor berates Mrs Gillyflower for experimenting on Ada to get the preservation formula right. Clara smashes the controls to the rocket. However, Mrs Gillyflower holds a gun to Ada's head and heads into the rocket silo, which has been disguised as a chimney, to reach the secondary control.

Mrs Gillyflower launches the rocket, but Vastra and Jenny have already removed the red leech poison from it, rendering it worthless. Strax shoots at Mrs Gillyflower to stop her from killing the others, causing her to tumble and die. Ada kills Mr Sweet with her cane. When Clara returns home, she finds the two children that she babysits for, Angie and Artie, have discovered photos of Clara from the past on the Internet. They force her to take them on a trip.



