
In the small Welsh hamlet of Cwmtaff in 2020, a driller at a mining operation called Mo is pulled underground after the ground opens during the night shift.

The Eleventh Doctor, Amy and Rory land in Cwmtaff instead of their intended destination, Rio de Janeiro. They meet the leader of the operation, Doctor Nasreen Chaudhry, who is studying minerals deep in the earth that have not been seen for over 20 million years. Nasreen is assisted by Mo's father-in-law, Tony Mack. An earth tremor causes the ground to open and sends Tony and Amy falling into it; Tony is rescued but Amy is pulled underground. The Doctor surmises that someone is programming the ground to attack Amy and the others using technology usually seen on jungle planets. The group is soon alerted to the presence of three life forms travelling up the drilling shaft deep below the earth, and they barricade themselves in the church. The Doctor explains Amy's disappearance to Rory and assures him he will get her back.

The three beings are discovered to be reptilian humanoids, and in a scuffle, they capture Mo's son Elliot and strike Tony with a venomous forked tongue; the Doctor and Rory subdue one while the other two retreat with Elliot back into the earth. The Doctor realises the beings are a new form of Silurians, and that they have relented in their attack since both sides hold a hostage. The captured Silurian calls herself Alaya; she was awoken by the drill. Alaya believes, as do all Silurians, that the Earth still belongs to them, that the drilling was a form of attack by the humans, and that they will defeat humanity eventually. Tony, suffering from the effects of the venom, says they should dissect Alaya, but the Doctor warns that it would be seen as an act of war. The Doctor decides to travel in the TARDIS down the drilling shaft to talk to the rest of the Silurians and work out a truce; Nasreen accompanies him.

Amy awakens to find herself strapped to an examining table, near to where Mo is also ensnared. Mo explains that the Silurians "dissected" him, awake, and will do the same to Amy. The Doctor and Nasreen arrive underground in the TARDIS. The show ends on a cliffhanger as the Doctor and Nasreen behold an immense Silurian civilisation in the caverns below the earth.



