
In modern-day Leadworth, Amy and Rory create a crop circle to gain the Doctor's attention via its newspaper coverage. He arrives with his TARDIS, but Amy and Rory's childhood friend Mels coerces them to travel back in time to "kill Hitler". Inside the TARDIS, Mels fires a gun, damaging the TARDIS and sending it out of control.

Back in 1938 Berlin, the Teselecta, a shape-changing, human-looking robot manned by a human crew from the future miniaturised inside it, is seeking to deliver justice on major criminals from the past by torturing them. The TARDIS crashes into Hitler's office as the Teselecta tortures Hitler and knocks over the Teselecta. Hitler shoots at the Teselecta, but hits Mels instead. As Rory locks Hitler in a cupboard, Mels regenerates, becoming the woman the Doctor knows as River Song. River, having been trained by her captors to kill the Doctor, kisses him with a poisonous lipstick which will kill the Doctor within the hour. The Doctor orders Amy and Rory to follow River, while he returns to the TARDIS. The Teselecta, aware that the Doctor's death in 2011 is a "fixed point in time", follows River, having identified her as a war criminal who is responsible for the Doctor's death.


The dying Doctor, having become aware of the Teselecta's nature, stops the Teselecta from punishing River at the Hotel Adlon. The captain, Carter, speaks to the Doctor, informing him that River has been trained to kill him by the Silence, a religious order that believes that silence will fall when "the oldest question in the universe" is asked. Amy forces the crew to abandon the Teselecta. Amy, Rory, and River find the Doctor near death; the Doctor asks River to find "River Song" and give her a message, then whispers something in her ear before he dies. River, who at this point still only knows herself as Melody Pond, asks Amy who River Song is. Amy uses the Teselecta records to show her who she will become. With this, River sacrifices her remaining regenerations to bring the Doctor back to life, and passes out. The Doctor, Amy, and Rory take her to a hospital in the far future, leaving a diary as a gift by her bedside, and depart. Aboard the TARDIS, the Doctor has discovered the date of his death from the records aboard the Teselecta.



