
The Eleventh Doctor, Amy and Rory find themselves flickering between two realities, falling asleep at the sound of birdsong in one and waking in the other. In the first reality, Amy and Rory stopped travelling with the Doctor five years previously, and are happily married in Leadworth, expecting their first child. They are chased by the Eknodine, an alien race that have disguised themselves as the elderly of the town. In the other reality, they are trapped in a powerless TARDIS, drifting towards a freezing cold star which will kill them. During one of their experiences in the TARDIS-reality they are met by the "Dream Lord", an apparition who tells them that he has created a dream reality in contrast to their actual reality. The three must determine which is the dream reality and kill themselves in it to return to the other reality. However, if they choose wrong they will be killed in both.

The Dream Lord keeps Amy awake in the TARDIS reality while the Doctor and Rory fall asleep and return to the Leadworth reality. The Dream Lord questions Amy as to whom she would choose between Rory and the Doctor. He states that she must choose between the worlds; one leads to a peaceful married life with Rory while the other leads to adventure and excitement with the Doctor. Amy returns to Leadworth and rejoins Rory in defending her house from the Eknodine whilst the Doctor is trying to rescue people from Leadworth in a motor-caravan. An Eknodine kills Rory. Amy decides that she is willing to risk her own life for the chance of seeing Rory again and concludes the Leadworth reality is false. Amy and the Doctor drive the motor-caravan into the house. The three wake up again on the TARDIS which the Dream Lord reactivates. After the Dream Lord's departure Amy and Rory are surprised by the Doctor when he directs the TARDIS to self-destruct.

The three wake up again on the TARDIS, no longer in any danger. The Doctor realises both realities were false since the Dream Lord had no power over the real world and was a manifestation of his darker side. The three were influenced by psychic pollen that had fallen in the TARDIS time rotor and heated up, creating the Dream Lord and the false realities. Rory comes to realise that Amy killed herself in the Leadworth reality out of love for him.



