

On the planet Telos, an archeological expedition uncovers a hidden entrance in a mountainside. Whilst one of the members tries to open the doors, he is electrocuted before the other members' eyes. Moments later, the TARDIS lands nearby and the expedition is met by the Second Doctor, Jamie and Victoria. Parry, the expedition's leader, explains that they are here to find the remains of the Cybermen, who apparently died out five centuries before. The expedition is funded by Kaftan, who is accompanied by her manservant Toberman and her colleague Klieg. Deciding to accompany them, the Doctor helps open the doors and, whilst he, Parry and Klieg stay to open the hatch leading to the tombs, the others explore the building.

Victoria, Kaftan and Viner, Parry's assistant, discover a chamber with a sarcophagus-like wall inset facing a projection device that was apparently used to revitalise the Cybermen. After Victoria is locked inside, the Doctor is called to help her escape, though he suspects Kaftan is to blame. Meanwhile, Jamie and Haydon, another member of the expedition, experiment with the control panel in another room. After activating a certain combination, a Cyberman emerges and a gun fires, killing Haydon. The Doctor investigates and deduces that the room is a testing range for weapons; the Cyberman being a dummy to be used for such purposes. With two members dead, Parry decides to call off the expedition, only to be informed by pilot Captain Hopper that someone has sabotaged the rocket ship, meaning they are left stranded until repairs are completed. Klieg finally opens the hatch and the team descend, leaving Kaftan and Victoria behind.

Beneath, the group find a vast chamber beneath with a multistorey structure, containing a small army of frozen Cybermen. Back in the control room, Kaftan drugs Victoria and reseals the hatch. Using the controls in the room, Klieg revives the Cybermen and betrays the group, killing Viner when he tries to stop the process. As the Cybermen emerge, Klieg reveals that he and Kaftan belong to the Brotherhood of Logicians, a cult that possess great intelligence but no physical power. He believes the Cybermen will be grateful for their revival and will ally themselves with the Brotherhood to conquer the universe. After they awaken, the Cybermen revive their leader, the Cyber-Controller, and take the group as prisoners. The Doctor realizes that the tombs are actually an elaborate trap, with the Cybermen keeping themselves frozen until they were revived and rebuild their invasion force to conquer Earth.

When Victoria awakens, she confronts Kaftan, who holds her at gunpoint to prevent her from interfering. However, she is attacked and rendered unconscious by a Cybermat, which Victoria destroys. Retrieving Hopper and co-pilot Callum, who have stayed to repair the rocket, they open the hatch to mount a rescue, using smoke grenades to distract the Cybermen. Though they are able to rescue most the party, Toberman is recaptured and taken to be converted. Disarming and placing Klieg and Kaftan in the weapon testing room whilst they wait for the rocket to be repaired, the group is attacked by a swarm of Cybermats, which the Doctor incapacitates with electrical currents. Having managed to repair a cybergun on the dummy, the Logicians return and open the hatch, believing that they can still forge their alliance with the Cybermen.

With their energy levels running low, the Cybermen return to their tombs whilst the Cyber-Controller and a partially converted Toberman meet with the group. Taking him to the revitalizing chamber, the Doctor attempts to sabotage the process, only for the Controller to escape and turn on the group. After it murders Kaftan, Toberman breaks free of the Cybermen's conditioning and apparently disables it. Whilst he, the Doctor and Jamie return to once again freeze the tombs, Klieg, unable to accept the Cybermen will not forge his alliance, tries to stop them, only to be murdered by a remaining Cyberman. After Toberman destroys it, the Doctor activates the tombs, hoping that the Cybermen will stay there for good.

The Doctor reseals the tombs and sets up counter measures to ensure the Cybermen will not be revived again. After resetting the defenses, he discovers the Controller is still functional and flees, working with the survivors to close it into the tombs. Whilst the others struggle to do so and keep the Controller inside, Toberman sacrifices himself to close the doors, completing the circuit, and electrocuting both him and the Controller. With the rocket repaired, the expedition leaves, the Doctor and his companions bidding them goodbye. As they return to the TARDIS, Jamie wonders whether they have seen the last of the Cybermen, which the Doctor doubts. As they leave, they fail to spot a surviving Cybermat, which approaches Toberman's body.



