
The Eleventh Doctor is on a farewell tour of his friends and has only one day to go before his death. He stops by Craig, who is living with his girlfriend Sophie in a new home in present-day Colchester and is raising their baby, Alfie. Craig, struggling to care for Alfie alone while Sophie is away for the weekend, suspects the Doctor is investigating something alien. The Doctor prepares to leave, but he notices a strange electrical disturbance in the area and decides to investigate.

The Doctor takes a job at the department store to investigate the disturbances further, along with reports of missing employees. The Doctor and Craig enter a lift and find themselves teleported to a Cyberman spacecraft. The Doctor manages to reverse the teleporter and disable it. With Craig's help, the Doctor enters the store after hours and catches a Cybermat, which has been siphoning small amounts of energy to the spacecraft. The Doctor also encounters a malfunctioning Cyberman in the building's basement, and is curious how it arrived in the store. At Craig's, the Doctor reprograms the Cybermat to track down the Cybermen signal.


The Doctor leaves on his own to locate the Cybermen at the store; Craig shortly follows, bringing Alfie along. The Doctor finds the spaceship actually sits below the store, underground, accessed from the changing room. With the siphoned energy, the Cybermen will soon have enough power to convert the human race. Craig, leaving Alfie at the store, follows the Doctor, and is captured and placed into a conversion machine to become the new leader of the Cybermen. Alfie's cries over the closed-circuit television echo in the ship. Craig, hearing Alfie, fights and reverses the conversion. The rest of the Cybermen painfully experience the emotions they have repressed from Craig's struggle, and their circuits start to overload. The Doctor and Craig escape via the teleporter as the ship explodes. The Doctor leaves in the TARDIS to face his death.

In the far future, River Song, recently made a Doctor of Archaeology, notes the date and location of the Doctor's death. She is interrupted by Madame Kovarian and agents of the Silence. Kovarian tells River that she is still theirs, and will be the one to kill the Doctor. Against River's will, they place her in an augmented astronaut's suit and submerge her in Lake Silencio in 2011 to await the Doctor.



