
The Tenth Doctor arrives on Mars in 2059, near humanity's first Martian colony, Bowie Base One. He dons a space suit to walk to the base, where inside he is detained by its crew led by Captain Adelaide Brooke. As they interrogate him, he discovers that today is a "fixed point" in time; the base will explode, killing the entire crew, but Adelaide's death will inspire her granddaughter to explore the stars. He tries to stay uninvolved, but Adelaide forces him to assist her responding to an alert from the remote biodome.
 
Two crewmen, Andrew Stone and Tarak Ital, appear to be in a zombie-like state, generating copious amounts of water. One of Adelaide's team gets infected, and they quarantine her while sealing off the biodome. From observation, they discover that the infection is by the intelligent virus, the Flood, and now seeks to get to Earth. The Doctor suspects the Flood were sealed in the glacier the base was using for water by the Ice Warriors aeons ago, and a bad filter allowed the virus to infect the crew. Adelaide realises the remaining crew have not yet touched that source of water and are uninfected, and orders the crew to evacuate to their rocket back to Earth while setting the base to self-destruct. Before departing, the Doctor is forced to explain to Adelaide what he knows happens and why he cannot get involved.
 
The Doctor starts walking back when he hears cries of help: the infected crew have broken the biodome seal and are now attacking the central hub with massive amounts of water, infecting several others. The rocket's pilot is infected, but he sacrifices himself by causing the rocket to self-destruct to strand the Flood, at the cost of stranding the remaining crew as well. The Doctor races back and rescues Adelaide and the last surviving crew, Yuri and Mia, via the TARDIS moments before the base destructs. He returns them to Earth, arriving outside Adelaide's home. The Doctor insists that he has the power to change the future of the human race and no-one can stop him. Adelaide steps into her home and kills herself. The Doctor is shocked; he realises that history has not changed save for knowledge of the base's fate from Yuri and Mia. Ood Sigma appears in the street. The Doctor sees this as a message and asks if it is time for him to die. Unresponsive, Sigma vanishes. Back in the TARDIS, The Doctor refuses to face his death and departs in the TARDIS.




