
Danny Pink, a former soldier emotionally scarred from his experiences, begins teaching Maths at Coal Hill School in the present. Clara, an English teacher at the school, invites him out for a drink. He agrees. Back at her office, Clara is briefed by the Twelfth Doctor about a damaged Dalek taken aboard the human rebel ship Aristotle in the future that declares its own race must be destroyed. Clara agrees to assist his efforts to help the "good" Dalek, despite the Doctor's contention that Daleks cannot be turned good.


The Doctor, Clara, and three rebel soldiers are miniaturised so they can enter the Dalek—nicknamed "Rusty" by the Doctor—to determine what is making it good. Entering Rusty, they come upon its "cortex vault", which the Doctor describes as Dalek technology designed to suppress any developing compassion within the living mutant inside the shell, as well as store all of its memories. Rusty, speaking to the Doctor, relates the beauty it had witnessed in the galaxy, including the creation of a star. Rusty drew from this that Daleks must be destroyed for wanting to destroy that beauty. The Doctor repairs Rusty's power cell. This unintentionally causes it to revert to its normal thinking pattern.

Rusty contacts the Dalek mothership, which sends other Daleks to destroy the rebel ship. Inside Rusty, Clara convinces the Doctor to reconsider his conviction that Daleks are irreversibly "evil". Inside the cortex vault, Clara awakens Rusty's memory of seeing a star's creation. The Doctor then links his mind to Rusty's consciousness, showing it the beauty of the universe. However, Rusty also assimilates the Doctor's own deep-rooted hatred towards the Daleks. It exterminates its fellow Daleks as they attempt to destroy the rebel ship. After leaving the inside of Rusty, the Doctor is disturbed that Rusty saw only hatred within him; he'd hoped for a "victory" in creating a "good" Dalek. Rusty responds that the Doctor is a good Dalek, while Rusty is not. Rusty sends a retreat signal to the Dalek mothership, causing it to believe the Aristotle has self-destructed.

The Doctor turns down the surviving soldier Journey's offer to travel with him, telling her that he wishes that she was not a soldier. The Doctor returns Clara to her office moments after she left. On leaving, she bumps into Danny, who is glad his being an ex-soldier does not put her off dating him.


