
The TARDIS lands by mistake in London on a parallel Earth. The trip has caused all of the TARDIS apart from a small power cell to die. The Tenth Doctor energises the cell with some of his own lifeforce. The cell needs 24 hours to fully recharge before the Doctor, Rose, and Mickey can return home. Rose is shocked to see a billboard with her father Pete's picture on it. Mickey decides to head off on his own and try to find his grandmother, who died in his universe. The Doctor and Rose discover that most of the population of London wear EarPod devices that feed information directly into the wearer's brain from Cybus Industries, which owns Pete’s company Vitex.

Meanwhile, the head of Cybus Industries, John Lumic, tries and fails to gain approval from the President of Great Britain for his plan to upgrade humanity by placing their brains into metal exoskeletons. Unknown to everyone else, Lumic has already been secretly turning homeless people into cyborgs. Cybus is being investigated by a group called the Preachers, who have been receiving secret information about Lumic's technology. Jake Simmonds, one of the Preachers, witnesses a group of homeless people being taken to be converted and goes to collect help. Jake finds Mickey at his grandmother's house, and confuses him with his parallel counterpart Ricky. Jake takes Mickey to the Preachers’ base where Ricky and Mickey meet. After some initial distrust, Mickey decides to join the Preachers as they follow the Cybus vans that kidnapped the homeless to Pete's wife Jackie's birthday party.

Rose and the Doctor also investigate the party and don servant garb to disguise themselves. Suddenly the party is interrupted by the Cybermen, who smash into the house and surround the guests. Lumic calls the President, who is in attendance, telling him that he is moving forward with his plans and that all of humanity will be upgraded. Lumic tells everyone that upgrading is compulsory. A Cyberman kills the President for refusing to comply. The partygoers panic, try to flee and the Cybermen begin killing them. The Doctor, Rose, and Pete escape the house and encounter Mickey and the Preachers outside. As the group is surrounded by Cybermen, the Doctor tells everyone to surrender and tells the Cybermen that they are volunteering for the upgrade. The Cybermen tell them that they are incompatible and will be deleted.




