
The Eleventh Doctor, aware of his imminent death and its time and place, attempts to learn about a religious order called the Silence to learn why he must die. He encounters the shapeshifting robot the Teselecta and its miniaturised crew posing as one of the members of the Silence; they offer him any help within their power as he faces his death. Through them the Doctor is led to Gantok, another Silence member, who takes him to the living head of Dorium Maldovar inside a catacomb. Dorium reveals that the Silence are dedicated to averting the Doctor's future, warning him that that silence must fall when "the first question" is asked on the planet Trenzalore, which is "Doctor who?" To avoid crossing his own time stream, the Doctor gives the Teselecta crew four invitations to Lake Silencio in 1969 for Amy and Rory, River, Canton Everett Delaware III, and a younger version of himself.

The Doctor comes to Lake Silencio, Utah to meet his death by a younger version of River, who is being forced to kill the Doctor in the automated space suit contrived by the Silence. River surprises the Doctor by draining the space suit's weapons systems and averting his death. Time becomes "stuck" as a result and begins to disintegrate; all of Earth's history begins to run simultaneously at a fixed moment.

On this "stuck" Earth (with all of time happening at once) Amy takes the Doctor to Area 52, a pyramid base where the Silence are contained in water-filled cells and Madame Kavorian is held hostage. River is also there; aware of the consequences of her actions, she refuses to allow the Doctor to touch her, an event that would lead to time going back to normal and the Doctor dying at Lake Silencio, Utah. Awakened by the Doctor's presence, the Silence escape their cells and attack the troops defending the pyramid. Amy allows Kovarian to die as revenge for the kidnapping and brain-washing of her daughter River. 

The Doctor and River escape to the top of the pyramid followed by Amy and Rory. The Doctor marries River on the spot and whispers to her to look into his eye. There she sees the miniaturized Doctor and realizes that he is inside the Teselecta ship and will not actually die if time's flow is restored. He then requests that River allow him to prevent the universe's destruction. They seal this agreement, and their marriage, with a kiss. Time moves forward and reality returns to normal. 

River later visits Amy and Rory to tell them the Doctor is still alive. Elsewhere, the Doctor explains to Dorium that the Doctor's perceived death will enable him to withdraw and be forgotten, as he was getting too much attention.



