

An unknown force pulls the TARDIS off course and forces it to land on an unidentified planet. Whilst exploring with Ian, the First Doctor recognises the planet as Vortis; however, the presence of several moons in the sky of the normally moonless planet puzzles him.

Inside the ship, an unknown force acting through Barbara's gold bracelet draws her outside, leaving Vicki alone. The TARDIS is then pulled by an unseen force across the planet's surface.

In her trance, Barbara walks into a trio of the butterfly-like Menoptra. They remove her bracelet, freeing her of the trance, then debate what to do with her. She escapes, but the Zarbi immediately capture her. Brainwashed through the use of a gold collar, the Zarbi use Barbara to find the Menoptra. The Zarbi take Barbara and the Menoptra called Hrostar to the Crater of Needles, where the Zarbi force them to gather vegetation and drop it into rivers of acid which feed the Animus.

The Zarbi capture the Doctor and Ian and take them to the Carsinome. There they find Vicki and the TARDIS. They also meet the Animus who forces the Doctor to help it track down the Menoptra invasion force. Ian escapes, whilst the Doctor and Vicki try to bide their time.

Ian meets with a Menoptra called Vrestin. He learns that the Menoptra were native to the planet Vortis along with the Zarbi, until a great evil force, the Animus took control of the planet through the Zarbi. By the time the Menoptra noticed the danger it was too late, and they had to flee the planet to one of the moons the Animus pulled into orbit around Vortis.

Back in the Carsinome, the Doctor accidentally reveals that the Menoptra spearhead plans to land at a place near the Crater of Needles. The Animus uses this information to ambush them.

The Zarbi soon locate Ian and Vrestin, but they escape. They meet the Optera, descendants of the Menoptra who fled the Animus underground. Ian and Vrestin convince the Optera to join them in fighting the Animus.

At the Crater of Needles, Barbara and Hrostar escape and try to meet up with the spearhead to warn them, but the spearhead is massacred.

At the Carsinome, the Doctor works out that the Animus uses gold as a conductor to channel its mesmerising force. He counteracts this force to control one of the Zarbi. The Doctor and Vicki escape. They meet up with Barbara and the Menoptra and devise a plan to attack the Carsinome.

The Doctor and Vicki return to the Carsinome, where the Zarbi take them to the Animus, a great spider-like creature, which mesmerises them. Meanwhile, Barbara and the Menoptra launch their attack on the Carsinome from outside whilst Ian and Vrestin with the Optera reach the Animus from below. They eventually defeat the Animus with a bomb.



