
The Eleventh Doctor, Amy and Rory arrive on an alien structure in space disguised as a 1980s Earth hotel. An alien Minotaur-like creature is in the hotel that consumes everyone who has been trapped here and is itself a prisoner who is in pain and wishes to end its life. It entices its trapped victims to enter one of the many rooms in the hotel which contains illusions of their greatest fears, upon which they become brainwashed to "praise him" and allow themselves to be taken. The hotel is inescapable and its halls and rooms can change on a whim. The Doctor, Amy and Rory soon find the TARDIS has also disappeared, and the Doctor warns them from opening any door they are drawn to, for fear of being possessed. Joe, Howie and Rita — humans that have been taken out of their routine lives by this prison's automated systems to feed the creature — are possessed by the creature and killed. While exploring more of the hotel, both Amy and the Doctor are separately lured to look into two specific rooms, facing their own fears.

The Doctor surmises the hotel and its rooms were, by design, meant to make the victims fall back on their faith by scaring them to allow the creature to possess them. The Doctor realises that it is Amy's trust in him that is being challenged; it is that faith that brought them to the hotel in the first place. Amy soon becomes possessed like the others. As the creature comes for Amy, the Doctor and the others grab her and take her to the room she opened previously. Inside, they find the illusion of young Amy, Amelia, waiting for the Doctor to return. The Doctor asserts to Amy that he is not a hero to break her blind trust in him; once this is done, the creature outside the door collapses on the floor. As they watch, the hotel is revealed to be part of a large simulation. The Doctor finds his TARDIS nearby. Gibbis, a survivor of the creature, asks for a lift home and the Doctor then takes Amy and Rory to London, believing it best for the two to stop travelling with him before they end up getting killed.



