
The Ninth Doctor uses the extrapolator on the TARDIS to generate a protective shield around it as he materialises the TARDIS around Rose to rescue her from the Daleks. The Doctor discovers the Daleks' Emperor survived the Time War and escaped to Earth in a crippled ship, where he rebuilt the Dalek race by harvesting DNA material from humanity.

Returning to the space station Satellite Five, Jack uses the extrapolator to shield the top six floors of the station and sets up defensive positions. The Doctor attempts to create a delta wave generator which will kill the Daleks, but will also destroy life on Earth. The Doctor tricks Rose into going inside the TARDIS, and uses his sonic screwdriver to direct the TARDIS to return Rose to her home time to keep her safe. The Daleks invade the station, killing everyone in their path.

After being returned home, Rose begins to notice the words "Bad Wolf" - words which also exist on Satellite Five - and realises that they are a message rather than a warning. She convinces Mickey and Jackie to help her try to open the heart of the TARDIS. Mickey uses a truck borrowed by Jackie to pull the panel on the console open and Rose is bathed in the light of the TARDIS. The TARDIS doors slam on Mickey and Jackie as they try to enter, and it then dematerialises.

The Daleks get to the top of Satellite Five, killing Jack and Lynda in the process. They file into the control room while the Doctor contemplates firing the delta wave, eventually deciding he can't do it. Before the Daleks can kill the Doctor, Rose arrives in the TARDIS, wrapped in the glow of the time vortex. She reveals that she is the Bad Wolf. She spreads the words “Bad Wolf” throughout time and space as a message to lead her there. Rose disintegrates the Dalek fleet. The Doctor begs her to relinquish her new power, but instead she brings Jack back to life. Rose begins to suffer the effects of the power and the Doctor kisses her, absorbing the entire power of the vortex into his own body to save her life. He releases it back into the TARDIS and carries an unconscious Rose back inside. They leave in the TARDIS before Jack can get back to them. As a result of absorbing the time vortex, every cell in the Doctor's body begins to die. He then regenerates into the Tenth Doctor.





