

The Thirteenth Doctor and her companions arrive in present-day Norway, materialising near a cabin. They meet its sole occupant, a blind teen named Hanne who moved to the cabin with her father Erik following the death of her mother Trine. Her father has since disappeared, with Hanne unable to search for him because she keeps hearing a creature in the cabin every day. Upstairs, the group discover a bedroom mirror with no reflection, revealed to be a portal. While the Doctor, Graham and Yasmin enter it, Ryan remains behind with Hanne. Upon finding speakers around the house aimed at keeping her inside, Ryan's discovery prompts Hanne to knock him out and enter the portal. 

The Doctor and the others find themselves in the Antizone, a buffer-space between universes to prevent catastrophic damage. They briefly encounter Ribbons, a deceptive alien who guides them through the zone only to become prey for flesh-eating moths when attempting to take the Doctor's sonic screwdriver. The others evade them by entering another portal, finding themselves within a reflected parallel universe, whereupon they encounter Erik talking with Trine, despite her being dead. At the same time, Graham finds himself encountering his own dead wife, Grace. The Doctor deduces that they are encountering the Solitract, a sentient entity whose incompatibility with the universe led to its exile, becoming a universe seeking companionship. Hanne arrives and immediately recognizes the Solitract version of Trine as an impostor before being ejected back to the Antizone.

The Doctor realizes that the Solitract is collapsing in on itself due to the group's presence. She then manages to get everyone out while convincing the Solitract to keep her instead of Erik by offering it her vast experience. The Solitract accepts the offer and ejects Erik, bringing the Doctor to a room within a white space. Despite her enthusiasm at the prospect of speaking to a sentient universe, as the Solitract assumes the form of a talking frog with Grace's voice, the Doctor explains she cannot stay as they are unable to co-exist. The Solitract releases her at her request, allowing her to make her way back through the Antizone before the portals collapse. After the adventure, Erik decides to return to Oslo with Hanne, while Ryan bonds with Graham and calls him "granddad" for the first time.



