
The Seventh Doctor and Mel arrive at the trading colony Iceworld on the dark side of the planet Svartos. They soon run into Sabalom Glitz, who is on Svartos to work off a debt that he owes to the crime lord Kane, and is preparing to explore the depths of Svartos to locate a treasure reportedly protected by a dragon, aided by a map given to him by Kane; in exchange, Kane will return Glitz' ship, the Nosferatu, and clear him of his debts. The Doctor and Mel offer to help, but Glitz asserts the expedition is too dangerous for Mel, and she stays behind at a local diner. She befriends Ace, a young woman who turns out to have actually come from 20th-century Earth, propelled forward in time when a mysterious time storm appeared in her bedroom while she was trying to experiment with "Nitro-9", an explosive of her own creation. The two eventually become weary of waiting and follow the Doctor and Glitz.

Meanwhile, the Doctor and Glitz follow Glitz' map, unaware that Kane has implanted a tracking and listening device into it. Kane controls a large number of beings that had been unable to repay their debts, their memories wiped and turned into cold-proof henchmen from Kane's touch. Kane has a number of these follow the Doctor and Glitz as to grab the treasure once it is found. The Doctor and Glitz eventually encounter the "dragon", but which turns out to be a biomechanoid that can shoot lasers from its eyes. When Mel and Ace arrive and pursued by Kane's men, the "dragon" helps to protect the two and defeat the men. The "dragon" leads the four to a control room where it plays a holographic message. The message explains that Kane is one half of the Kane-Xana criminal gang from the planet Proamon. They were chased down by authorities, and Xana, Kane's lover, killed herself in the process, while Kane was exiled to Svartos. The message continues that the Iceworld spaceport is really a giant spacecraft, whose power source lies in the "dragon"'s head, and Kane seeks this as to be able to escape Svartos. The Doctor suspects Kane must have been trapped here for millennia.

Kane, overhearing this, sends more of his forces to seize the "dragon"'s head, while causing chaos among the spaceport, including destroying the Nosferatu with numerous escaping passengers aboard. Kane's men succeed in decapitating the dragon before they are killed, and Kane using a communicator to tell the Doctor and the others to bring him the head. The Doctor does so, accompanied by his allies. Kane use the head to initiate Iceworld's engines and it detaches itself from the planet. Kane attempts to set course to Proamon, but finds the computers unable to do so; the Doctor explains that Proamon was destroyed a thousand years after Kane was exiled on Svartos. With no hope, Kane purposely allows his body to be exposed to the light of the nearby star, melting and killing him. 

As order is restored on Iceworld, Glitz declares himself owner of the vessel, and renames it Nosferatu II. Mel decides to stay with Glitz, while the Doctor offers to take Ace home to Perivale via the "scenic route".



