


The Thirteenth Doctor directs the TARDIS to a planet called Ranskoor Av Kolos, where a large number of distress signals are originating. The Doctor and her companions find a large number of wrecked spaceships scattered on the planet's surface, as well as a psychic field that alters one's perception of reality. They come across an amnesiac pilot named Paltraki and help him regain his memories before he receives a video signal from Tzim-Sha. Tzim-Sha demands Paltraki to return an item – seemingly a rock floating in a protective shell - to him in exchange for Paltraki's kidnapped crew. Graham later confesses to the Doctor his intent to kill Tzim-Sha to avenge his murdered wife Grace, accepting that he could never travel with the Doctor again should he survive.

Once the group enters Tzim-Sha's ship, Graham and Ryan search for the kidnapped crew whilst Yasmin helps Paltraki remember his mission. The Doctor encounters Tzim-Sha, learning that he ended up on Ranskoor Av Kolos after their previous encounter on Earth, having won the loyalty of the religious-minded Ux, a race of two that can psychically manipulate reality. Tzim-Sha spends the next three millennia combining the Uxs' powers with Stenza technology to create a life support system and a weapon that shrinks planets like the one from Paltraki's ship. Yasmin and Paltraki discover four similar planets, the latter remembering his mission to save the planets Tzim-Sha took alongside a fleet that the Stenza devastated. Tzim-Sha then sets his sights to do the same to Earth out of revenge, ignoring the Doctor's warning that his actions threaten the fabric of reality.

The Doctor reaches Yasmin and safely stops the Ux from shrinking Earth, convincing them that Tzim-Sha exploited them while asking their help. The Doctor works with the Ux to use the TARDIS and Tzim-Sha's ship to restore the planets to their original positions in space. Meanwhile, Graham and Ryan free Paltraki's crew along with the other ships' crews. This alerts Tzim-Sha as he enters his trophy room, finding Graham waiting to shoot him. But Graham manages to hold back, before Ryan's arrival provokes him to shoot Tzim-Sha in the foot to save his grandson. They trap Tzim-Sha in a stasis chamber, telling him to reflect on his actions, including Grace's death. With Tzim-Sha's ship sealed, the Ux leave with Paltraki to help return the surviving crew members to their proper worlds.


