
The Doctor has retreated to a monastery in Cumbria in 1207 to contemplate the mystery of Clara Oswald, a woman he has met twice previously but who died both times. The Doctor answers the exterior phone on the TARDIS when it starts ringing. On the other end is Clara, whom the Doctor initially does not recognise. Clara, having been given the TARDIS' number by "a woman in the shop" and believing it is a computer help line, asks for help to connect to the Internet. When Clara repeats a phrase which previous versions of Clara have said, the Doctor realises who she is. He sets off to meet her.

Arriving in present-day London, the Doctor finds Clara being "uploaded" via a mobile robotic server disguised as a young girl using the Wi-Fi. The Doctor halts the upload and successfully reverses it, sending a message that Clara is under his protection. The Doctor and Clara are outside when the uploaders cause an airplane to descend at them. The Doctor and Clara board the TARDIS and land on the plane, and the Doctor saves it from crashing.

The Doctor and Clara travel to a café. Clara uses computer skills that she picked up from her uploading experience to track the uploaders to their base at The Shard. The Doctor encounters people inside the café under the control of Miss Kizlet, who explains that living human minds are being fed to her client. Miss Kizlet distracts the Doctor long enough for a server disguised as the Doctor to upload Clara completely. An angered Doctor reprograms this server, and sets it out to Miss Kizlet's office inside The Shard. The Doctor server demands that she release all the minds that have been uploaded, but Miss Kizlet refuses. The Doctor then uses the server to upload Miss Kizlet to the network. Trapped in the network, she orders her subordinates to release her. By doing this, everyone else including Clara is restored.

The restored Miss Kizlet contacts her client, the Great Intelligence, to report her failure to him. The Great Intelligence orders her to reset all people working there, including herself, clearing their memories in the process. Meanwhile, the Doctor takes Clara home and offers her a chance to travel with him, which she refuses. She tells him to come back the next morning, as she may change her mind by then.



