

The Ninth Doctor, Rose, and Jack find themselves separated, waking up with temporary amnesia in various television game shows which are more fatal than their twenty-first century counterparts. On The Weakest Link and Big Brother, losing contestants are disintegrated. On What Not to Wear, participants undergo brutal cosmetic surgery. The Doctor escapes Big Brother with a contestant called Lynda, and Jack escapes What Not to Wear. The Doctor discovers that they are on the space station Satellite Five in the year 200,100. The station is now under the control of the Bad Wolf Corporation, which shares the name with a set of words that are following the Doctor and Rose through time and space. Lynda explains that 100 years ago, when the Doctor last visited, Satellite Five stopped broadcasting and humanity became confused and lost. The three search for Rose. They find her just as she loses the final round of The Weakest Link and is promptly disintegrated by the Anne Droid.

The Doctor, Jack, and Lynda are arrested, but escape their capture and travel to the control room on Floor 500. There they meet the Controller, a cybernetic human. The Controller uses the cover of a solar flare to speak directly to the Doctor, telling him that her masters cannot hear her during the flare. The Controller used a teleport called a transmat to hide the Doctor and his companions in the games as her masters do not watch them. The solar flare ends before she can tell the Doctor who is controlling her. Jack finds the TARDIS hidden in a restricted area, which he uses to figure out that contest losers are not actually disintegrated but transmatted off the station. The Controller begins giving the Doctor the coordinates that the transmat leads to, knowing that her masters will hear. The Controller disappears in a transmat beam and wakes up on a spaceship, where she is killed by her masters. Rose wakes up on the floor of a spaceship and is horrified to see a Dalek approaching her. The Doctor and Jack discover a signal coming from the station that is hiding something at the edge of the solar system. They cancel the signal and reveal a fleet of Dalek spaceships. The Daleks open a communication channel to the Doctor, threatening to kill Rose if he interferes. The Doctor refuses to back down and vows to rescue Rose and wipe out the Daleks.


