
The First Doctor, his granddaughter Susan, and her teachers Ian and Barbara arrive on a small island on the planet Marinus where they meet Arbitan, Keeper of the Conscience of Marinus—a vast computer developed as a vast justice machine which kept law and order across the entire planet. Arbitan explains that the society of Marinus is in danger, as the Voord, humanoid creatures protected by amphibian-like black rubber wet suits, are seeking to enter the tower to take control of the Conscience. To prevent this, the Conscience requires five keys, and Arbitan coerces the Doctor and his friends to gather them by placing a force field around the TARDIS. As they teleport to the City of Morphoton, Arbitan is stabbed to death by a Voord that has gained access to the tower.

In Morphoton, the crew are impressed by the luxuries of the city; however, Barbara soon realises that they have been hypnotised, and that Morphoton is actually a place of dirt and squalor. The creatures who govern Morphoton order Barbara's death, but Barbara escapes and hides in the city, where she makes contact with the slave girl Sabetha, who has been blamed for Barbara's awakening and sentenced to death. Barbara notices one of the keys around her neck. They escape and destroy the creatures, freeing the subjects of the city. Another slave, Altos, remembers that he was also sent by Arbitan, and he and Sabetha join the Doctor and his crew on their quest. While the Doctor continues to the City of Mellennius, the others search in a dangerous screaming jungle. After triggering a trap, Barbara is lost in an ancient temple in the jungle; while Ian remains at the temple to search for the key, Sabetha and Susan continue to the next location.

Ian finds Barbara in the temple, where they discover an aged scientist, Darrius, who reveals the location of the next key before dying; Ian and Barbara retrieve the key and teleport to an icy wasteland. They meet the duplicitous trapper Vasor, who steals their keys. Ian and Altos confront Vasor and force him to take them to the ice caves, where they find Sabetha and Susan with mechanised Ice Soldiers, and discover the next key frozen in a block of ice. As they flee, Vasor takes Susan hostage, but an Ice Soldier kills him and the group escapes. At the next location, Ian is accused of the murder of Eprin, a friend of Altos. At Ian's trial, the Doctor returns and postpones the trial while he gathers evidence. Susan is kidnapped as a hostage to persuade the Doctor to stop investigating. The kidnapper has persuaded the judges to find Ian guilty; however, Susan is found bound and gagged, and the plot is uncovered. The Doctor finds the final key, hidden in the murder weapon, and Ian is freed.

The travellers return to Arbitan's island, where Altos and Sabetha have been held prisoner by Yartek—Arbitan's killer—and the four keys have been seized. The Doctor frees Altos and Sabetha and unmasks the Voord. Ian gives Yartek a false key found in the screaming jungle; when Yartek places the key in the Conscience, the machine explodes and he is killed along with the occupying Voord. The Doctor, Susan, Ian and Barbara flee the tower with Altos and Sabetha before the growing blaze overtakes the ancient structure.




