
The "Gangers", duplicates of several workers at an island acid factory, have turned against their human counterparts, forcing the humans to take shelter in a secured commons area. There, they discover that a Ganger of the Eleventh Doctor exists. Rory has gone off alone to find the emotionally distraught Jennifer. The Ganger Jennifer kills the real Jennifer, and then stages a fight with another Ganger Jennifer to fool Rory that she is the human version. Ganger Jennifer leads Rory to a console, claiming it will restore power when instead it disables the cooling system for the acid, making it dangerously unstable. She then convinces Rory to lead the human group into the acid storage chamber and traps them inside; crewman Jimmy is killed trying to stall the acid release.

Using a video call for Jimmy's son Adam, the Doctor convinces the Ganger Jimmy and the other Gangers they are just as real as their human counterparts. Ganger Jennifer becomes furious at this display and rages off; the other Gangers agree to work with the humans to escape the facility. They free the humans trapped in the acid storage room, and race off through the crypts below the monastery, chased by a savage Ganger Jennifer who has transformed herself into a monster. Ganger Cleaves and the Ganger Doctor hold the door to allow the Doctor, Amy, Rory, human Cleaves, Ganger Jimmy and Ganger Dicken to escape to the TARDIS. The Cleaves and Doctor Gangers together face the monster, triggering a sonic screwdriver at the right moment to cause them and the monster to dissolve back into liquid.

Aboard the TARDIS, the Doctor indefinitely stabilises the Gangers' forms to ensure that they remain human permanently. Ganger Jimmy goes to meet Adam, and Cleaves and Dicken go to their headquarters where they plan to reveal the truth of the Flesh to humanity. As the TARDIS crew turns to leave, Amy starts feeling contractions. Back aboard the TARDIS, the Doctor admits his trip to the factory was planned: he wanted to investigate the Flesh in its raw form, as he has known for some time that Amy is a Ganger herself. He promises her that he will find her and then disrupts her form, turning her back to raw Flesh. Amy wakes up pregnant in a pristine white tube, observed by the "Eye Patch Lady", and starts entering labour.



