
Clara phones Danny, ready to admit the full truth of her travelling with the Twelfth Doctor and that she sincerely loves Danny. Danny is killed by a passing car midway through the call. Visibly upset, Clara schemes to use a hypnotic patch on the Doctor to blackmail him into saving Danny. The Doctor eventually reveals that the patch did not work on him; instead, he had used it on Clara to learn why she was upset and to see how far she was willing to go. He offers—as a friend, despite her betrayal of him—to see if they can locate Danny in the afterlife.

Clara focuses on Danny's location with the TARDIS' telepathic interface. The Doctor and Clara arrive at a mausoleum called the  Institute, which holds several tanks of human skeletons submerged in a substance called dark water; the dark water hides the exoskeletons that support the skeletons. They are greeted by Missy, who says she is a welcome droid. The scientist Dr Chang explains to them that 3W was founded to protect the dead after voices heard within white noise broadcast signals suggested the dead are aware of their bodies being cremated.

During all of this, Danny is greeted by Seb in an apparent afterlife called the Nethersphere. Seb helps Danny adjust to his recent death. As part of his orientation, a meeting is arranged between Danny and a young civilian boy he accidentally killed while he was a soldier. The boy runs off. Danny receives a call from Clara at 3W. The Doctor leaves with Chang to investigate further while Clara takes the call. Not wishing Clara to die, Danny does not convince her that he is really Danny, and tricks her into ending the call. Though Danny almost deletes his emotions, he hesitates when he sees the boy watching him.

Missy instructs the skeletons to rise and begin draining the tanks. She kills Chang with a handheld device. The skeletons are revealed to be Cybermen. Missy tells the Doctor that dying minds are uploaded to the Nethersphere—a spherical Time Lord "hard drive"—where the emotions are deleted and the mind is downloaded into upgraded Cyberman bodies. The Doctor realises that Missy is not a droid, but a Time Lady. The Doctor races out of 3W and finds that it is inside St Paul's Cathedral in contemporary London. Missy reveals her identity as a female incarnation of the Master, having changed her name to fit her new gender. Clara is trapped in Chang's laboratory with another Cyberman.



