
In Clara's flat, the Twelfth Doctor answers the TARDIS's phone; both are surprised to find themselves in a room with two others: Psi, a hacker with an augmented brain, and Saibra, a mutant shapeshifter. A recording includes messages from each agreeing to a short-term memory wipe, before getting instructions from the Architect to break into the Bank of Karabraxos and steal three items from its vault.


The head of bank security Ms. Delphox uses a telepathic alien called the Teller to detect those with criminal intent and destroy their brains; the Doctor believes the memory wipes were needed to avoid being caught. Within, the Doctor, Clara, Saibra, and Psi find six devices left by the Architect that appear to be atomic shredders, to be used if they are caught to die quickly and painlessly. Both Saibra and Psi sacrifice themselves with shredders when they encounter the Teller, allowing the Doctor and Clara to reach the vault door.

The door appears impossible to open, but then a solar storm strikes the planet's surface, triggering an automatic unlocking sequence; the Doctor realises this was a "time travel heist". They recover two items: a serum to stabilise Saibra's DNA, and a circuit to restore Psi's long-term memories. The Doctor and Clara are captured and brought to Delphox's office. The guards reveal themselves as Saibra and Psi; the shredders are actually short-range teleports to an escape ship in orbit. The storm threatens to destroy the Bank, but the Doctor wants to uncover the third item.

They meet the Bank's director Madame Karabraxos in her private vault. Karabraxos directs Ms. Delphox to have the Teller brought to the vault, before having Delphox incinerated for letting Karabraxos down. Before Karabraxos departs, the Doctor gives her the TARDIS phone number to use when she has a moment of regret. When the Teller arrives, the Doctor lets it restore his short-term memory. The call to the TARDIS was from a dying Karabraxos, regretting something she left in the vault. The Doctor became the Architect of the time heist to assemble Saibra and Psi and plant the teleports to get them to this point. The Doctor shows them why they had six teleports: Karabraxos wanted him to rescue the Teller's mate that she had locked up to force the Teller's cooperation. The Teller frees its mate. The two are evacuated to an unpopulated planet to live out in peace.


