
The Eleventh Doctor, believing Amy's attraction to him is due to the stress from travel, gatecrashes her fiancé Rory's stag party and invites the two of them on a romantic trip to Venice in 1580. The city's patron, Signora Rosanna Calvierri, claims that the Black Plague runs rampant outside of Venice. The Doctor says this is false and that it appears she is using the plague as an excuse to seal off the city. While investigating they encounter Guido, a boat-builder whose daughter Isabella has not contacted him since enrolling in Rosanna's school for girls.


Amy devises a plan to place herself inside the school. Amy unlocks a gate and allow the others in, but in doing so is captured and taken to a chamber. The Doctor and Rory come to believe the women are being converted into vampires. Amy kicks at Rosanna's side and disrupts a device that is hiding her true fishlike alien form. They begin converting Amy into one of them when Isabella, who has yet to be fully converted, frees Amy and they escape. Isabella hesitates while escaping because she can no longer tolerate direct sunlight and is pulled back inside. Isabella is later thrown into a canal by Rosanna and eaten by something that lives underwater.

The Doctor goes back inside to question Rosanna who confirms that her race is from the planet Saturnyne, and they landed on Earth after seeing "silence, and the end of all things". The Doctor deduces that aside from Rosanna, only the males of the species survived the trip, and that Rosanna and her son Francesco must want to sink the city into the water and convert girls into "compatible girlfriends" to procreate. When the Doctor returns to Guido's home to regroup with Amy and Rory, Rosanna sends her transformed girls to attack them. Guido blows up several kegs of gunpowder, killing him and the girls. Rosanna activates a device on a tower that begins to create the earthquakes and floods that will sink Venice. While Amy and Rory face and defeat Francesco, the Doctor climbs the tower and stops the device in time. The last female of her kind, Rosanna throws herself into the canal to be eaten.

Afterwards, Amy and the Doctor invite Rory to continue travelling with them, but as the Doctor and Rory are about to enter the TARDIS, everything falls silent.



