
The Eleventh Doctor and Amy arrive on Starship UK, a colony ship in the future the population of the United Kingdom evacuated on to escape deadly solar flares. Amy is taken by the monk-like Winders to one of many voting booths set up on the ship when she investigates a hole containing a tentacled creature. She is shown a video about the truth of Starship UK, and then asked if she wants to protest the truth or forget it, the latter causing her short-term memory to be wiped. Amy chooses to forget, and creates a video to herself to prevent the Doctor from learning the truth, before the mind wipe. The Doctor is curious as what "protest" will cause and activates it, sending him and Amy into the maw of a giant creature below the ship. The Doctor induces the creature to vomit, allowing them to escape back to the ship. The Doctor and Amy meet Queen Elizabeth X, known as Liz 10, the ruler of the ship.



The Winders eventually capture the group, and they are taken to the Tower of London. The Doctor discovers that Starship UK rides atop a giant Star Whale, controlled by sending painful electrical impulses to its brain via a control panel in the Tower. Liz 10 finds a message from her younger self telling her that she ordered this, and is given the option either to forget and keep the Star Whale piloting the ship, or to abdicate and cause the ship’s destruction.

The Doctor decides to make the Whale brain-dead, allowing it to continuing travelling. As the Doctor starts the process, Amy recalls hearing the Winders' leader Hawthorne stating the Whale would not eat the children. She forces Liz 10 to hit the abdicate control; to everyone's surprise, the Whale continues travelling, at a faster speed. Amy posits that like the Doctor, the Whale had come to Earth willingly to help save the remaining children, and is helping Starship UK.

After the Doctor and Amy return to the TARDIS, they receive a call from Winston Churchill at the Cabinet War Rooms, where the shadow of a Dalek appears.



