
In 2012, the Eleventh Doctor, Amy, and Rory enjoy a picnic in Central Park. The Doctor reads a novel about a 1930s detective named Melody Malone. Rory is sent to 1938 by a cherub Weeping Angel and meets River Song, who wrote Melody Malone. The Doctor and Amy find Rory written into the Melody Malone novel and attempt to take the TARDIS to 1938, but the TARDIS struggles to get there.


The Weeping Angel collector Grayle captures River and Rory. He locks Rory in the cellar with several cherub Weeping Angels, while he has a Weeping Angel grab River by the wrist while he interrogates her. River is able to use her vortex manipulator to allow the TARDIS to arrive. Amy, knowing River wrote the book to help them, uses it to look for Rory. River breaks her wrist to free herself. Amy finds the cellar empty and the Doctor locates Rory at an apartment building nearby.

Rory enters an apartment with an elderly version of himself in bed, who dies without having seen Amy for many years. The Doctor deduces that the Weeping Angels have been using the building as a battery farm, sending the victims to their past while feeding off their time energy. Rory and Amy refuse to accept their fate and flee to the roof. Amy and Rory jump off the roof, creating a paradox that destroys the building and the Weeping Angels.

The Doctor, River, Amy and Rory find themselves near the TARDIS in a graveyard in 2012. Rory catches sight of a gravestone with his name on it. He is then sent into the past by a Weeping Angel who had survived the paradox. The Doctor is unable to go back to get him, due to the paradox. Amy allows herself to be touched by the Weeping Angel in the hope of being with Rory. Her name then appears along with Rory's on the gravestone.

River declines to travel with the Doctor, but insists he should not travel alone. Unsuccessfully motivating him, River tells the Doctor she will ask Amy to write an afterword in the novel. The Doctor recovers the last page of the book he had torn out earlier, where Amy wrote to him, encouraging him to not travel alone. As a final request from Amy, the Doctor goes back to her garden in 1996, the morning after young Amelia Pond had waited for him ("The Eleventh Hour"), to tell her about her future adventures. 


