

Ryan Sinclair, a dyspraxic youth, calls the police after causing a blue pod to appear while retrieving his practice bike. After showing the pod to PC Yasmin Khan, his old school friend, Ryan receives a call from his grandmother, Grace, learning that she and her husband Graham O'Brien, are trapped on board their train by a floating orb of electric tentacles, alongside a crane operator, Karl. Ryan and Yasmin reach the train just as the newly-regenerated Doctor falls through the carriage ceiling. The orb departs, shortly after zapping the group with an energy bolt. Karl leaves while the others remain with the Doctor, suffering partial post-regeneration amnesia while discovering they have all been implanted with DNA-destroying bombs.

The search for the orb brings the group to a warehouse whose owner acquired the pod, linking it to his sister's disappearance, arriving just after the man was killed by an alien that emerged from the pod.  The Doctor, assuming the two aliens are mortal enemies, tinkers with the pod and builds a replacement sonic screwdriver from spare parts before the group finds and subdues the orb.  The orb is revealed as a mass of biological data-gathering coils with data on Karl.  The second alien soon appears, introducing himself as Tzim-Sha of the warlike Stenza who came to Earth for a ritualistic hunt for leadership.  Though a furious Doctor (addressing him as "Tim Shaw") demands Tzim-Sha and his people leave Earth alone, he downloads the coils' data before teleporting to Karl's location at a construction yard.
 
After the group are unsuccessful in preventing Tzim-Sha capturing him, the Doctor fully recalls her identity and confronts him. Ordering Tzim-Sha to release the human, she threatens to destroy his recall device and strand the Stenza on Earth upon his refusal. Tzim-Sha responds by detonating the DNA bombs, but the Doctor reveals she transferred them back into the coils, which the Stenza unknowingly self-implanted while downloading its data. As the Doctor throws the recall device at Tzim-Sha to return him to his planet, Grace dies as the result of falling from the crane while successfully destroying the coils. Following Grace's funeral and a change of clothing, the Doctor builds a teleporter to reach the TARDIS. She bids the others farewell, only to inadvertently bring them with her into deep space.





