
In the 17th century, a pirate ship is stranded in the ocean, terrorised by a Siren-like creature who marks people with black spots on their palms after they are injured and appears to disintegrate them with her touch after putting them in a trance. Rory receives a cut during a tussle with the pirates, and finds a black spot on his hand, but is prevented from succumbing to the song of the Siren by Amy and the Eleventh Doctor. Surmising the Siren is using water as a portal, the Doctor instructs the crew to seek refuge in the ship's dry magazine. There, they find Toby Avery, the son of the ship's captain Henry Avery, who stowed away on the ship in order to join the crew after his mother died, unaware of his father's illicit deeds. He too has a black spot on his palm due to a fever. The Doctor and Avery fail to escape in the Doctor's ship the TARDIS, and the Siren takes the TARDIS. After another shipmate is taken by the Siren in a dry room, the Doctor realises the Siren is using reflection to appear, not the water. In response they rid the ship of reflective surfaces, including the ship's stolen treasure.

When a storm begins, the crew start to set sail. Toby drops a polished crown while bringing his father a coat. The Siren is summoned and takes Toby. Soon, Rory falls into the ocean, and the Siren takes Rory. Believing the victims are not dead, the Doctor convinces Avery and Amy to prick themselves to get the Siren to take them. The Siren's touch actually teleports them to an alien spaceship, invisible in the same spot the pirate ship is located. The Doctor finds the spaceship's crew long dead from exposure to a human disease. The trio then discover a sickbay where Avery's entire crew, Toby, and Rory are in medical care along with the TARDIS. The Siren turns out to be the ship's virtual doctor, caring for the injured humans; the black spots are tissue samples she uses as references to understand how to help them. Amy convinces the Siren to release Rory into her care. Using Rory's nursing knowledge, Amy and the Doctor remove him from life support and are able to resuscitate him. Meanwhile, Avery stays with his son on the ship and flies the spaceship with his crew.



