
A Soviet submarine is sailing near the North Pole in 1983 during the Cold War. In the submarine's cargo hold a sailor prematurely begins to defrost a block of ice that Professor Grisenko believes contains a frozen mammoth, and is attacked by an Ice Warrior.


The submarine begins sinking as the Ice Warrior runs amok. The TARDIS materialises inside the submarine and the Eleventh Doctor and Clara tumble out. The Doctor convinces Captain Zhukov to maneuver the submarine to the side, landing it safely on a ridge and preventing it from imploding. During this the TARDIS dematerialises by itself. The Doctor encourages the crew to be peaceful to the escaped Ice Warrior, Grand Marshal Skaldak, but the ship's executive officer Stepashin knocks out Skaldak. Knowing that Skaldak will desire vengeance for being attacked, the Doctor and the crew chain Skaldak.

Clara volunteers to speak to Skaldak to try and calm him, relaying the Doctor's words to Skaldak, though he knows that the Doctor is listening. The Doctor informs Skaldak he was encased in the ice for 5000 years. Skaldak laments the loss of his daughter and his people; however, the Doctor tries to comfort him with the knowledge that the Ice Warriors still live, just not on Earth or Mars. Skaldak does not believe the Doctor and stops broadcasting his distress call to the other Ice Warriors. The Doctor surmises that, thinking himself to be the last of his kind, Skaldak has nothing left to lose. He grabs and kills three members of the crew, including Stepashin.

Having learnt of the ongoing Cold War and the doctrine of mutually assured destruction from Stepashin, Skaldak plans to use the submarine's nuclear missiles to provoke a global thermonuclear war and destroy humanity as revenge for the humans attacking him - under the Martian code humanity as a whole has declared war on the Ice Warrior race by assaulting him. Reaching the bridge, he is able to connect himself to the submarine's missile guidance systems and activate the missiles. The Doctor and Clara are attempting to persuade Skaldak to show mercy when the submarine is rocked by a tractor beam from above: the Ice Warriors heard Skaldak's distress call and haul the submarine to the surface. Skaldak is beamed aboard the Ice Warriors' spaceship and deactivates the missiles remotely. The Doctor discovers the TARDIS has relocated to the South Pole.



