
The Doctor and science officer Ida investigate a pit under a recently opened trapdoor deep below the planet Krop Tor. In the sanctuary base, Rose and three of the surviving members of the crew, Jefferson, Danny and Toby, flee from the advancing Ood, who are all possessed by the Beast. Toby appears to be no longer possessed by the Beast. As the Doctor and Ida prepare to return to the base, the Beast communicates with the Doctor and the rest of the crew through the Ood and explains that he was sealed in the pit before the universe began. The Beast demoralises the Doctor, Rose, and the crew. The lift cable snaps shortly after, trapping Ida and the Doctor 10 miles underground.

With Zach cornered in the base control room by Ood, Rose and the rest of the crew go into the maintenance tunnel. However, the Ood are in pursuit, so Zach seals off the junction. On the way, Jefferson is trapped and, unwilling to be killed by the Ood, asks Zach to remove the air on the other side and so suffocates to death. Rose, Danny and Toby go to incapacitate the Ood by disrupting the telepathic field that keeps them functioning. After the group reunites with Zach, Zach knocks out the unwilling Rose and takes her with them to board the escape rocket and leave the planet.

Meanwhile, the Doctor and Ida use the lift cable to explore the pit, although the Doctor finds nothing but darkness far below. He then chooses to detach himself and fall, landing at the bottom thanks to an air cushion and finds that he can breathe. The Doctor finds the physical form of the Beast. He quickly deduces from the unintelligible grunts coming from the Beast that its consciousness has already escaped and that Krop Tor was designed as the perfect prison for the Beast: its jailers devised the jars as a failsafe, since their destruction would cause the planet to plunge into the black hole. The Doctor smashes the jars anyway to destroy the Beast. As the planet falls out of orbit, the Doctor stumbles across his TARDIS.

The rocket is also pulled towards the black hole, and Toby reveals the mind of the Beast is still possessing him. Rose takes Zach's bolt gun and shoots out the rocket's front window, unhooking Toby's safety harness to jettison him into space. Meanwhile, the Doctor rescues Ida and tows the rocket to safety with the TARDIS. He returns Ida to the rocket, but did not have time to save the Ood.



