
The Cybermen have the Tenth Doctor, Rose, Mickey, and the Preachers surrounded. The Doctor uses the recharging power cell from the TARDIS to overload the Cybermen. The group escapes with Pete, but Jackie is trapped inside. As they flee, Pete explains to the Preachers that he is the Preachers' secret source of information on John Lumic. Pete had mistakenly thought he was communicating with law enforcement. From his hovering zeppelin, Lumic activates the EarPod devices and use them to control the people of London and bring them in for conversion at the factory in Battersea Power Station.

When they reach the factory, the group discovers Lumic's zeppelin moored nearby and head towards it. Ricky is killed by the Cybermen while trying to scale a fence to meet Mickey. Mickey and Jake decide to board the zeppelin to destroy the EarPod transmitter on board, Pete and Rose try to find Jackie, and the Doctor and Mrs. Moore try to find their way to Lumic. Pete and Rose are captured by the Cybermen and taken to Lumic when a now-converted Jackie catches sight of them. Mrs. Moore is killed by a Cyberman, but the Doctor discovers that each unit contains an emotion inhibitor. He deduces that if he disables the signal from the inhibitors, the realisation of what they have become will kill the converted Cybermen. The Doctor is captured by a Cyberman and taken to Lumic.

In Lumic's office, the Doctor discovers the Cybermen have forcibly converted Lumic into the Cyber Controller. Mickey and Jake successfully disable the transmitter, causing the humans to flee the factory. The Doctor subtly tells Mickey over a surveillance camera to find the inhibitor code in the Lumic family's database. He finds it and sends it to Rose's phone. The Doctor plugs the phone into the computer systems, causing the inhibitor signal to drop and sending the army of Cybermen into despair. The Cybermen explode, setting the factory on fire, and the group escapes to the zeppelin. Lumic attempts to follow but falls into the inferno below.


The Doctor plugs in the recharged power cell and revives the TARDIS. Rose reveals to Pete that she is his daughter from the parallel universe. Overwhelmed, Pete walks away. Mickey, feeling that Rose no longer needs him, decides to stay in the parallel universe to help care for Ricky's elderly grandmother and to help the Preachers stop the remaining Cybermen.



