
The Eleventh Doctor and Amy, following a message from River Song, arrive in Roman Britain in 102 AD. River shows the Doctor a Vincent van Gogh painting she recovered titled The Pandorica Opens, which depicts the TARDIS exploding. The Doctor realises the Pandorica, a fabled prison for the universe's deadliest being, must be stored in a memorable location near the coordinates: Stonehenge.

Beneath Stonehenge, the Doctor, Amy, and River find the Pandorica. While examining the Pandorica, Amy confronts the Doctor about an engagement ring she had previously found in the pocket of his jacket and feels a strong emotional attachment to. River warns the Doctor that  "everything that ever hated [him]" is being drawn to the Pandorica. The Doctor is aided by a volunteer group of Roman legionaries; the centurion in charge of them is Amy's fiancé, Rory. Neither Rory nor the Doctor can explain Rory's presence, as he was consumed by a crack in the universe and erased from existence.

The Doctor urges River to bring the TARDIS to Stonehenge while he, Amy, Rory, and the legionaries prepare. When River tries to use the TARDIS, an outside force takes control of it and pilots it to Amy's house in the present day, which has been broken into. In Amy's room, River finds a story book about Pandora's box and a children's book about Roman Britain. River communicates this to the Doctor, warning him that the Pandorica must be a trap, created out of Amy's memories. Realising that River is at the onset of the time energy explosion that caused the cracks in the universe, the Doctor warns her to leave immediately, but she finds herself again trapped in the TARDIS as the central control console begins to go critical.

Back at Stonehenge, the Doctor discovers that the volunteer legionaries, including Rory, are Autons, and he is quickly captured as his other orbiting foes materialise around him. Above ground, as Rory fights to retain his human identity, Amy suddenly remembers him, but as his Auton identity emerges he fatally shoots Amy. The Doctor's captors reveal that they have formed an alliance to imprison him in the Pandorica. Knowing the TARDIS exploding would cause the cracks destroying reality, they believe only the Doctor can operate the TARDIS, and thus removing him will prevent the explosion. As the Doctor is sealed inside the Pandorica, every star in the sky goes supernova.



