
Androzani Minor is the only source of the spectrox drug, produced by bats within the desert planet's cave systems. The citizens of neighboring Androzani Major rely on spectrox for its life-extending capabilities. Spectrox mining is controlled by Trau Morgus's business conglomerate, but is threatened by Sharaz Jek, a masked figure who hides within the cave systems and controls an army of androids that disrupt mining efforts. Morgus has publicly funded the military operation led by General Chellak to defeat Jek, but secretly employs gunrunners Stotz and Krelper to supply Jek with weapons to profit from the war.

The TARDIS lands on Androzani Minor, and the Fifth Doctor and Peri start to explore the caves. They both get caught briefly in a sticky substance but move on. The two are captured by Chellak, who believes them to be aiding the gunrunners. Chellak communicates their image to Morgus who does not recognise them and orders their execution. At their execution, Chellak discovers that Jek had been able to replace them with androids.

In Jek's lair, the Doctor and Peri complain about illness, and the real Salateen diagnoses that they had stepped in raw spectrox, which is lethal; the anti-toxin is the milk of the queen bat, but due to the recent war, the bats have descended to the deepest levels of the mine that are devoid of oxygen. Jek explains that he is at war with Morgus as his actions led to his dis-figuration. Jek leaves the two under guard of his androids while he meets Stotz and Krelper. The Doctor reprograms the androids to allow them to escape. They are caught in the middle of one of the battles, and Peri is captured by Chellak, while the Doctor is forced to leave with Stotz and Krelper.

Stotz decides to take the Doctor to see Morgus directly, and communicates with him holographically en route. Morgus sees the Doctor alive, and believing the military is deceiving him, kills the President of Androzani and makes his own arrangements to travel to Androzani Minor to set things right. The Doctor commandeers Stotz's ship and flies it back to the surface of Androzani Minor, setting off to rescue Peri.

Chellak initiates a major attack against Jek's androids, which ends up costing him his life as well as most of the soldiers and androids. During this, Jek rescues Peri as she starts to succumb to the spectrox poisoning. At his base, Jek activates the cooling system to help soothe Peri's aches. The Doctor, starting to also feel the effects, arrives at the base. Jek takes pity on the two, and directs the Doctor to where he can find the queen bat and providing him with an oxygen tank.

Morgus lands by Stotz's crashed ship, and learns that his shrewd secretary has deposed him from power. Morgus quickly deals with Stotz to get Jek's supply of spectrox and leave together to profit, and Stotz kills Krelper. They follow the heat signature from Jek's cooling system to find his base. Morgus, Stotz, and Jek get into a fight, and end up killing each other.

The Doctor finds the queen bat and collects two vials of her milk. Returning to the base, he collects Peri and wearily carries her out of the caves, dropping one of the two vials before he can get to the TARDIS. He sets the TARDIS in motion and feeds Peri the remaining vial. Peri quickly recovers but finds the Doctor lying in pain on the floor. The Doctor explains that there was only enough bat's milk left to cure her, but his body will shortly regenerate, though it feels different from his previous regenerations. The Doctor begins to hallucinate images of his past companions urging him to continue to fight for his life. The Doctor says 'Adric?' before the Master yells that he must die and the regeneration completes, with the Sixth Doctor suddenly alert and active though with a new face. When Peri asks what is happening, the Doctor replies, "Change, my dear, and it seems not a moment too soon..."



