
A superluminal signal is sent to Earth, carrying with it an energy blob that seems intent on capturing the Doctor. The homeworld of the Time Lords is also under siege, their power being drained through a black hole. Trapped themselves, and desperate to send help, the Time Lords do the unthinkable, breaking the First Law of Time by recruiting a previous incarnation of the Doctor from his own past. As the Second Doctor cannot get along with the present Third Doctor, they attempt to retrieve the First Doctor to "keep them in order", but he is trapped in a "time eddy", unable to fully materialise, communicating through a viewscreen. 

The Doctors investigate, while UNIT headquarters faces an attack by shapeless blob-like creatures. The First Doctor realises that the black hole is a bridge between universes, so they allow the TARDIS to be swallowed up by the energy creature, finding themselves in an antimatter universe created by the legendary Time Lord Omega, a solar engineer who created the supernova that powers Time Lord civilisation, but which also supposedly killed him. In fact, he remains trapped in his antimatter universe, whose reality is maintained by his will alone. 

Omega seeks revenge on those who he imagines left him stranded, and intends for the Doctors to take his place maintaining the reality of his antimatter universe. But exposure to the effects of the black hole's singularity have destroyed Omega's physical body: he cannot leave. Omega now demands that the Doctors share his exile.

The Doctors propose a way to free Omega, offering him a force field generator. In a rage, Omega knocks it over and the Second Doctor's recorder falls out of it (having fallen into it earlier, thus remaining unconverted positive matter) annihilating everything it meets in the antimatter universe in a flash, returning the Doctors in the TARDIS to their universe. The Third Doctor explains that death was the only freedom anyone could offer Omega.

With the Time Lords' power restored, they return the First and Second Doctors back to their respective time periods. As a reward, the Time Lords give the Third Doctor a new dematerialisation circuit for the TARDIS and restore his knowledge of how to travel through space and time.



