

An Earth colonisation survey expedition to the beautiful jungle planet Deva Loka is being depleted as members of the survey disappear one by one. Four have gone, leaving the remainder somewhat apprehensive. Sanders relies on bombast and rules, while Hindle his deputy, is close to breaking point. Only Todd, the scientific officer, seems to deal with the situation with equanimity. She does not see the native people, the Kinda, as a threat but rather respects their culture and is intrigued by their power of telepathy. The social structure is also curious in that women seem dominant and are the only ones with the power of voice. The humans are holding two silent males hostage for "observation". Todd believes they are more advanced than they first appear, as they possess necklaces representative of the double helix of DNA, indicating a more advanced civilisation.

Elsewhere in the jungle, the TARDIS crew are also under stress, especially Nyssa, who has collapsed from exhaustion. The Fifth Doctor constructs a delta wave augmenter to enable her to rest in the TARDIS, while he and Adric venture deeper into the jungle. They soon find an automated total survival suit (TSS) system, which activates and marches them to the Dome, the colonist base. Sanders is a welcoming but gruff presence, further undermining Hindle at regular intervals. Sanders decides to venture into the jungle in the TSS, leaving the highly-strung Hindle in charge. His will is enforced by means of the two Kinda hostages, who have forged a telepathic link with him, believing their souls to have been captured in his mirror. The Doctor, Todd and Adric are arrested as Hindle now evinces megalomania.

Tegan faces a more metaphysical crisis. She has fallen asleep near the euphonious and soporific windchimes, unaware of the danger of the dreaming of an unshared mind (one not engaged in telepathy with another humanoid). Her mind opens in a void, where she undergoes provocation and terror from a series of nightmarish characters, one of which taunts her: "You will agree to being me, sooner or later, this side of madness or the other". The spectres are a manifestation of the Mara, an evil being of the subconscious that longs for corporeal reality. Mentally tortured, she eventually agrees to become the Mara and a snake symbol passes to her arm. When her mind returns to her body, she is possessed by the Mara. She passes the snake symbol to the first Kinda she finds, a young man named Aris, who is the brother of one of the Kinda in the Dome. He too is transformed by evil and now finds the power of voice.

Back at the Dome, Hindle has conceived a bizarre and immolatory plan to destroy the jungle, which he views as a threat. Adric plays along with this delusion but Hindle’s world starts to fall apart when, first, Adric "betrays" him and then Sanders defies expectation and returns from the jungle. Sanders is radically different from the martinet in earlier episodes. Panna, an aged female mystic of the tribe, presented him with a strange wooden box called the "Box of Jhana" which, when opened, cleared his mind and left him a more contented and enlightened person. When Hindle continues to claim authority over the Dome, Sanders plays along with his deputy's megalomania - "As you like. You know best."  He still has the box and shows it to Hindle, who makes the Doctor open it.

The Doctor and Todd see beyond the toy inside and share a vision from Panna and her young ward, Karuna, who invites them to a cave. The shock of the situation (accompanied by strange phenomena) allow the Doctor and Todd to slip away into the jungle, where they encounter Aris dominating a group of Kinda and seemingly fulfilling a tribal prophecy that "When the Not-We come, one will arise from among We, a male with Voice who must be obeyed." Karuna soon finds the Doctor and Todd and takes them to meet Panna in the cave from the vision, with the wise woman realising the danger of the situation now Aris has voice. She places them in a trance like state and reveals that the Mara has gained dominion on Deva Loka. The Great Wheel, which turns as civilisations rise and fall has turned again and the hour is near when chaos will reign, instigated by the Mara. The vision she shares is Panna’s last act: when it is finished, she is dead.

In the Kinda world, multiple fathers are shared by children, just as multiple memories are held and at Panna's death, her life experience transfers to Karuna. She urges Todd and the Doctor to return to the Dome, to prevent Aris leading an attack on it, which will increase the chaos and hasten the collapse of Kinda civilisation.

At the Dome, Hindle, Sanders and Adric remain in a state of unreality, with the former becoming ever more demented, unbalanced, and infantile. Sanders continues to humour him, even to the point of talking Adric out of an initial escape attempt. Adric does eventually escape, however, and attempts to pilot the TSS but is soon confronted by Aris and the Kinda. He panics and Aris is wounded by the machine (which responds to the mental impulses of the operator) and the Kinda scatter.

The Doctor and Todd find an emotionally wrecked and sleeping Tegan near the windchimes and conclude that she was the path of the Mara back into this world. They find Adric and the party heads back to the Dome, where Hindle has now completed the laying of explosives, which will incinerate the jungle and the Dome, the ultimate self-defence. Hindle is tricked into opening the Box of Jhana and the visions therein restore his mental balance as with Sanders. The two enslaved Kinda are freed when the mirror entrapping them is shattered. The Doctor then devises the only method of combating the Mara; since evil cannot face itself, he organises the construction of a large circle of mirrors (actually reflective solar panels) in a jungle clearing. Aris is trapped within it and the snake on his arm breaks free, whereupon he is pulled from the circle. The Mara swells to giant proportions but is then banished back from the corporeal world to the Dark Places of the Inside.

With the threat of the Mara dissipated and the personnel of the Dome back to more balanced selves, the Doctor, Adric and an exhausted Tegan decide to leave (as does Todd, who decides 'it's all a bit green'). When they reach the TARDIS, Nyssa greets them, fully recovered.



