

The Eleventh Doctor and Amy take the TARDIS to the Cabinet War Rooms during the Second World War. As the Doctor arrived late, Winston Churchill turned to the scientific advances of Professor Edwin Bracewell, including robotic devices called "Ironsides", which are recognised immediately by the Doctor as his arch-enemies, the Daleks, but act as Bracewell's inventions. The Doctor attacks the devices, shouting "I am the Doctor and you are the Daleks!" Unbeknown to the Doctor and the humans, a Dalek ship is in orbit near the Moon; upon hearing the Doctor's "testimony", which has just been transmitted by the Ironsides, the Dalek aboard uses it to activate a "Progenitor device" and alerts its comrades on Earth. The Daleks reveal their intent and expose Bracewell as an android before returning to their ship. The Doctor follows in the TARDIS, leaving Amy behind for her protection.

The Doctor threatens to destroy the ship, including himself, before the Progenitor completes, as part of the Daleks’ plot to restore their race, but the Daleks fire an energy beam at London that lights up the entire city minutes before an air raid by the Luftwaffe, leaving the Doctor's allies vulnerable and creating a stalemate.

When the Progenitor completes, five brand new Daleks in larger, redesigned casings emerge from the Progenitor Chamber. They disintegrate the older "impure" models, who die willingly. At the same time, Amy convinces Churchill and Bracewell to use the technological know-how they have obtained from the Daleks to modify three Spitfires so that they can fly in space. The pilots attack and destroy the dish on the underside of the Dalek ship that was firing the energy beam.

Before the last Spitfire pilot can destroy the ship, the Daleks trigger the power source inside Bracewell that contains an unstable wormhole that will consume Earth if released. The Doctor, torn over defeating the Daleks or saving Earth, orders the Spitfire to stop its attack and returns to Earth. With the Doctor's help, Amy is able to convince Bracewell that he is more human than machine, deactivating the device. The Daleks, having played on the Doctor's compassion for Earth, announce their victory and retreat into hyperspace. The Doctor and Amy remove all the advanced technology borrowed from the Daleks despite Churchill wanting to use it for the war, and convince Bracewell that he need not be deactivated because he helped save the world.



