
In 1983, Vislor Turlough, a stranded alien posing as a human student, is given an offer by the Black Guardian for passage off Earth if he should kill the Fifth Doctor.

Meanwhile, the Doctor, Tegan and Nyssa find the TARDIS stuck in the warp ellipse of a starliner trapped in time. Materialising aboard, they find a transmat device, with separate endpoints to Earth in 1977 and 1983, is creating the interference. Turlough arrives from the 1983 transmat, feigning lack of comprehension of the situation. The Doctor instructs Nyssa and Tegan to stay aboard the TARDIS while he returns with Turlough to 1983 to fix that transmat point, hoping it will allow the TARDIS to escape. Instead, the TARDIS materialises in 1977 at Turlough's school. Suspecting that UNIT would know its whereabouts, the Doctor visits his friend, retired Brigadier Lethbridge-Stewart, now a maths teacher at the school, and is surprised to learn some trauma in the past has made him lose the memories of the last few years. However, as the Doctor talks about 1977, the Brigadier starts regaining some memories.

In 1977, Nyssa and Tegan leave the TARDIS and find a horribly disfigured man in the transmat capsule, whom they believe is the Doctor. They seek out help from the younger Brigadier, and the "Doctor" urges all three to return with him to the starliner via the TARDIS. In 1983, the Doctor detects the TARDIS' movement, and he, Turlough, and the older Brigadier also return to the starliner via the transmat. The Doctor regroups with his companions; realising two versions of the Brigadier are aboard, he instructs them all to keep the two separated, as if they should touch, it could release a potentially catastrophic energy discharge due to the Blinovitch limitation effect.

The figure posing as the Doctor is forced to reveal himself as Mawdryn, one of several scientists aboard the liner who were trying to discover the Time Lord secret of regeneration. Their experiments failed, and he and his fellow scientists have become immortal in this painful state and seek to die, but the Doctor determines the only way to do so is to give up his remaining regenerations. He attempts to leave with his companions, but find that Nyssa and Tegan suffer the same affliction as Mawdryn and de-age rapidly once in the Time Vortex, and quickly returns to the ship. The Doctor agrees to give up his regenerations and prepares to transfer this energy. Elsewhere on the ship, the two Brigadiers, having been left alone, have managed to find each other. They reach out to touch, and the flash of energy occurs just at the right moment before the Doctor gives up his regenerations as to help end Mawdryn and his colleagues lives as requested, restoring Nyssa and Tegan, and saving the Doctor. The younger Brigadier passes out from shock, and the Doctor suspects this was the trauma that caused him to lose his memories. The TARDIS crew return the Brigadiers to their proper time, and the Doctor accepts Turlough's request to join his crew, unaware of the Black Guardian's influence.



