


A group of futuristic humanoids in 1984 London are shot by two policemen led by Commander Lytton. Two of the humanoids, Galloway and Quartermaster Sergeant Stien, escape into the adjacent Butler's Wharf where a time corridor is situated, but Galloway is killed. Lytton transports back to his battle cruiser in the far future and prepares to attack a prison space station whose only prisoner is the creator of the Daleks, Davros, who has been held there since the events of Destiny of the Daleks.

Meanwhile, the Fifth Doctor, Tegan and Turlough are being dragged down a time corridor in the TARDIS following on from the events at the end of Frontios. They emerge in the London Docklands.

The Daleks' assault on the prison station is fought off by the station crew, led by Dr. Styles and Lt. Mercer. Lytton persuades the Dalek Supreme to use poisonous gas, and the Daleks take over the ship. Watch Officer Osborn attempts to destroy Davros, but Lytton and an engineer break into the cell and kill Osborn before she can complete her mission, then release Davros from his cryogenic imprisonment.

The Doctor and his friends meet the traumatised Stien, and all return to the warehouse to hunt for the end of the time corridor. There they meet a military bomb disposal squad, called in by builders. While the others are distracted, Turlough stumbles into the time corridor, ending up on the Dalek ship.

Having learned that the Doctor is in the warehouse, the Supreme Dalek orders a Dalek to detain him. The Dalek travels through the time corridor and kills several of the squad's men before the Doctor advises them to focus their fire on its eyestalk, blinding it. In the resulting struggle, the humans push the Dalek out of the warehouse window, and it explodes on hitting the ground. Tegan suffers a head injury and blacks out. Only Styles, Mercer, and two guards are left alive of the original crew. Disguised in uniforms taken from Lytton's guards, they plan to blow up the station via its self-destruct system.

Davros tells Lytton that he has been in cryogenic storage for 90 years, and vows to take his revenge on the Doctor. While Davros's travel chair is undergoing maintenance by the engineer Kiston, Lytton explains that the Daleks lost their war against the Movellans because of the development of a virus that specifically attacks Dalek tissue, and they have awakened Davros to find a cure. Davros demands that he remain on the prison ship while working on the virus, in case he needs to be refrozen. When Lytton leaves to discuss this with the Supreme Dalek, Davros uses a hypodermic-like mind control device to take control of Kiston.

The Doctor and the members of the bomb disposal squad search for the Kaled mutant that was housed inside the destroyed Dalek. They kill it only after it wounds one of the squad's men. The Doctor and Stien head into the TARDIS to find out what is happening at the other end of the time corridor. The TARDIS materialises inside the Dalek ship and the Doctor tells Stien that they should find Turlough and make a swift exit. But Stien reveals that he is an agent of the Daleks. A patrol of Daleks close in to exterminate the Doctor, but Lytton enters and informs them that the Supreme Dalek has ordered that the Doctor be taken alive. The Daleks lead the Doctor away. Turlough joins the remnants of the ship's crew, telling them that the time corridor might help them escape the effects of the ship's self-destruct.

On Earth, the man attacked by the Dalek creature appears disorientated. The group commander, Colonel Archer, decides to radio for help; he, seeks help from two policemen (Lytton's associates). As he tries their radio, a policeman holds a gun to his head.

The Daleks reveal their plan of cloning the Doctor and his companions and using the clones to assassinate the High Council of Time Lords on Gallifrey. Stien begins the mind-copying sequence while the Doctor tries to talk him into resisting his Dalek mind conditioning. Styles and the two station guards are killed when trying to activate the self-destruct system.

On Earth, a clone of Colonel Archer goes to the warehouse under Dalek control. The bodies of Colonel Archer and his men are later seen aboard the Dalek ship. Tegan makes an escape attempt but is recaptured by the policemen and taken to the Dalek ship. The squad's scientific advisor, Professor Laird, is shot while trying to flee the soldiers. Two Daleks take Davros, where he demands tissue to establish the cure. After consulting The Supreme Dalek, they agree but Davros uses the mind control device to take control of them. 

In the duplication chamber, Stien is overcome with confusion: the Doctor has realised that Stien's conditioning is unstable and tries to reawaken his ability to think for himself. Just as the mind-copying sequence nears completion, Stien breaks his conditioning and stops the process, freeing the Doctor. The Doctor finds Turlough and Tegan, and they return to the TARDIS along with Stien and the last surviving station crew member. Rather than depart, the Doctor decides to destroy Davros once and for all. With Stien and Lt. Mercer he heads to the station lab, leaving Tegan and Turlough in the TARDIS, which he has surreptitiously programmed on time delay to return them to the warehouse. The Doctor confronts Davros in the lab, but his chance to kill him is lost when Stien's conditioning re-asserts itself long enough to let Lytton's troops kill Lt. Mercer. Stien refuses to accompany the Doctor back to the time corridor and runs off into the station.

Davros' army (consisting of Kiston, a soldier and two Daleks) is growing and he dispatches his Daleks to Earth. Anticipating resistance from the Daleks not loyal to him, Davros breaks open a capsule of the Movellan virus. Two Daleks enter with the intention of exterminating him but are themselves killed by the virus. At the warehouse, a battle takes place between Davros' Daleks and those loyal to the Supreme Dalek. The Doctor returns through the time corridor, realising that the "unexploded bombs" discovered earlier on are canisters containing the Movellan virus. He opens a canister that Tegan and Turlough have brought into the TARDIS, and places it behind the Daleks who start to die.

Lytton has escaped and sees the Daleks' demise. He swaps his Dalek uniform for that of a policeman and joins his two fellow "bobbies" on their next vigil. Back on the space station, Davros prepares to flee in an escape pod, but the Movellan virus attacks and seemingly kills him. The Supreme Dalek appears on the TARDIS scanner and threatens the Doctor, claiming that the Daleks have duplicates of prominent humans all over Earth. Meanwhile, Stien is trying to activate the self-destruct sequence. Just as he is about to finish, the Daleks enter and exterminate him, but he manages to complete the sequence and destroys both the station and the Dalek ship.

The Doctor calls for them all to leave, but Tegan refuses, saying she no longer enjoys her adventures, and runs off. The Doctor is saddened by this, and he and Turlough leave. As the TARDIS vanishes, Tegan runs back, remembering the Doctor's old admonishment: "Brave heart, Tegan." She calls out to the empty air that she will miss him.



