
The explosion of the TARDIS has caused the universe to have never existed, except for the Earth, its moon, and a sun-like object. In Roman Britain, an Auton version of Rory mourns Amy after he shot and killed her. The Eleventh Doctor appears to Rory, handing him his sonic screwdriver. Rory frees the younger Doctor trapped in the Pandorica with the screwdriver. The Doctor then places Amy's body inside the Pandorica, which will restore her once given an imprint of her living DNA. The Doctor uses River Song's vortex manipulator to jump ahead nearly two millennia; Rory, in his ageless Auton body, decides to stay with Amy and guard her.


In 1996, seven-year-old Amelia Pond finds instructions from the Doctor which leads her to touch the Pandorica in a museum. This allows Amy to be revitalised and freed. They are soon joined by the Doctor and Rory, now a museum guard, and get chased by a Dalek restored by the light of the Pandorica. The Doctor uses the vortex manipulator to go back and give Rory his screwdriver. As the universe continues to collapse, Amelia disappears. The Doctor discovers that the "sun" is the still-exploding TARDIS; River, trapped inside the TARDIS, is being kept alive in a time loop. The Doctor saves River.

The Doctor creates a diversion for the Dalek, allowing him to rig the Pandorica to fly into the TARDIS explosion, using what exists of the original universe inside the Pandorica to create a second Big Bang. Before this, the Doctor instructs Amy to focus on her family and Rory to restore them in the new universe. The Doctor begins witnessing events in his life in reverse as the cracks in the universe close. The Doctor has to stay outside this new universe for that to happen. After a final goodbye to Amelia on the night they met, he enters the cracks and disappears.

Amy wakes in her home in 2010 to discover that her parents and Rory have been brought back into existence. Amy and Rory celebrate their wedding day. At the reception, River leaves her diary for Amy which prompts Amy to recall the Doctor. She interrupts her father's speech, imploring the Doctor to come to the wedding. The TARDIS and the Doctor appear in the reception. Aboard the TARDIS, the Doctor explains to Amy and Rory that unanswered questions remain about the TARDIS explosion.




